[h1]The Ninth World[/h1]
A billion years in the future, humanity lives in the Ninth World. There have
been eight wondrous worlds before, but all have fallen and left behind only
inscrutable mysteries and powerful relics. The Ninth World is Earth -- our Earth
-- after it has been shaped and reshaped by countless civilizations that could
do amazing and terrible wonders.   

Not much is known about these past civilizations and ages, but this is what [b]is[/b] known:
[ul]
[li]At one point Earth was the part of or the center of a galactic empire[/li]
[li]One previous civilization modified the sun, somehow adding millions if not billions of years to its life[/li]
[li]Mercury is gone, either moved or dismantled for reasons unknown[/li]
[li]At least one previous civilization could bend or break the laws of nature, able to use physics like a toy[/li]
[li]At least one previous civilization had access to alternate universes, both parallel and alternate[/li]
[li]At least one previous civilization had access to alternate dimensions[/li]
[li]For a period of time, humans were completely extinct[/li]
[li]The moon has been shifted in its orbit, and now lay further away from Earth[/li]
[li]The moon has a green third, covered in what appears to be miles-tall trees[/li]
[li]The moon has a silver third, seeming to be a completely smooth surface[/li]
[li]The moon has a blue third, covered in a azure ocean -- with leviathans that can occasionally be seen from Earth swimming beneath its waves[/li]
[li]Either the orbit or the rotation of the earth has been modified, if not both; days are now 28 hours long and there are 6 seasons[/li]
[/ul]

[h2]The Tale of Ager[/h2]

Ager Hammersplint is the man responsible for the party being out here, at the
edge of the known world, trying to make a shanty town into something more.

Once a glaive who spent his days wandering the Steadfast, in his youth Ager
stumbled upon a trove of numenera and ancient knowledge that made him a very
rich man. He spent the next decade slowly building a trade empire that brought
his growing family even more wealth. Based in the city of Qi, Ager became a
well-known and much loved figure in the town's politics. He shared his wealth
liberally, despite the protestations of some of his family and some other high
ranking members of the city.

However, Ager couldn't shake the wanderlust that inspired him to start
travelling in the first place. He'd spend a few years at home before putting on
simple clothes and wandering out into the world once more. He'd always come
home, with more tales of wonderous locations and amazing numenera to trade or
sell -- or keep in the family vault.

In his travels, Ager discovered something out in the Beyond. Past the Black
Riage, past the Ba-Adenu Forest, somewhere along the great wall of mountains
that makes the southern portion of the Clock of Kala, Ager found something. Set
into the side of the clock was what appeared to be a great arch, made of a
strange metal that reflected only some wavelengths of light. While he was unable
to get the archway working when he first found it, he knew there must be a
way. Naming it the Kala Arch, he set off to find out the tools and knowledge he
needed to activate the arch.

He spent the next decade of his life looking for a way to turn this device on,
wondering what strange new lands it would take him to.

Eventually, he was able to get the archway working, and it turned out to be
exactly what Ager had been looking for his whole life. It lead to an area of the
Ninth World unknown to any in the Steadfast. Here, finally, was the discovery
that would turn his name into one known across the Steadfast and beyond.

He spent the next few years venturing out into this new land, getting to know
the land and it's peoples.

[h2]Calda & The Sable Hegemony[/h2]

Ager found many new things in the land, which he eventually learned was called
Calda. This land was vast, encompassing an area nearly the size of the Steadfast
back home. And while some customs and places were strange to Ager, what was
stranger was how much it felt like home. The people in Calda spoke Truth, or
something close enough that he was able to learn the language quickly and
easily. Even the abhumans that troubled him in the Steadfast and the Beyond
could be found in Calda, although there were some new ones that nearly ended his
life on more than one occasion.

The largest difference though was political. Where the Steadfast was a
collection of various countries ( each controlled by its own ruler, whether
king, queen, or otherwise ), Calda was a single empire -- ruled by the Sable
Hegemony. It took Ager a few years to understand how a single ruler could hold
so much territory without everything falling apart.

Eventually he discovered the reason, and like so much of history in the Ninth
World this was the tale of another great numenera: the Singhan Roots. These were
vast tunnels that spread out from "terminals" -- great obelisks of emerald and
gold. Each obelisk had a great doorway that lead underground, into what at first
seemed to be great hollow spaces. It wasn't until Sadhna Mannava discovered the
Silver Rod that the purpose of the Roots became known. The Silver Rod was a
numenera with a very specific purpose: to control the great machines that
traveled through the system of tunnels that made up the Singhan Roots. With the
Silver Rod, Sadhna was able to put together an army that could not be
defeated. In a time when armies would take weeks or months to reach another
city, Sadhna was able to travel through the Singhan Roots and arrive at any
terminal with his full army in only a day.

Despite the advantage given to her by the Silver Rod, it took many years before
the foundation of her empire came to be realized. Some cities capitulated
instantly when an army showed up the day after war was declared -- it's hard to
defend your city when 99% of your army is still being gathered from outlying
towns and villages. Other cities, however, had either standing armies or
powerful numenera they could use to defend themselves from attack. While the war
was officially declared over forty years after it began, it would take several
more generations before the empire began to settle into a long time of peace.

To make the management of this empire easier, it was split into provinces. Each
province would have multiple city-states that took on the role of managing and
maintaining that province. In most provinces, a [i]cherhal[/i] was built --
basically small, neutral towns where the arbiters from the ruling city-states
could meet to discuss ongoing matters and concerns. These towns were often built
far from other towns, and rarely had a permanent population. More often the town
would be built to last, and then left alone until it was needed. Only when a
[i]chermoot[/i] was called, then a horde of traders, servants, slaves, staff,
city officials, and noble families descend upon the town to bring it to
life. Eventually these cherhal gained a secondary purpose. When times are
peaceful, a cherhal is used a handful of times in a year. Besides the yearly
tithing, city-states can call a chermoot for any reason, but few do outside of
trying to prevent hostilities between neighbours from breaking out into open
conflict.

Because despite being united under the banner of the Sable Hegemony, city states
still found reasons to go to war. However, the effects of the province system
and the cherhals has proven to be the key to the endurance of the Sable
Hegemony's empire. If city-states within a province fell to conflict over
resources or perceived insults, then their neighbours could call a chermoot to

Great city-states were given dominion over vast provinces of the empire, each
free to rule and use the land as they pleased, so long as they followed two
rules:

[ol]
[li]That each year a tithe of food, materials, and numenera would be given to the Sable Crown[/li]
[li]That if the empire came under threat, the city would raise levies and march to war to protect the empire[/li]
[/ol]

The history of the region had produced the Sable Hegemony, a power unrivaled
anywhere Ager had been in the past.

It was for this reason that Ager was very careful to hide the Kala Arch. He knew
that if the wrong people found out about it then both the Beyond and the
Steadfast could be in danger. While he knew his future lay in Calda, he knew the
people of the Steadfast didn't deserve a future of war and death if the Sable
Hegemony invaded. So Ager made a plan -- he would move his family and his
trading empire to Calda. He hoped that one day he could find a way to link the
kingdoms of the Steadfast and the city-states of Calda through trade without
having to worry about the land of his birth being torn apart by war.

Ager never found a way other than the portals that could link Calda to the
Steadfast.

Something Ager did find though, was a whole unexplored region.

[h2]The Way to Maka-Tho[/h2]

At the north-western most point along the coast of the sea lay the capital of
the empire:Â Tehis, City of the Brass Tower. And while that city is great and
wondrous, with many stories of its own -- that is not where this story takes
place. Tehis lay at the junction of three things: the sea, the plains, and the
Kark Mountains. However, travel east along the foot of that mountain range, and
eventually you come to the Grey Sea.

The Grey Sea is a strange place. Not an ocean of water, or even liquid: the Grey
Sea is a valley of perfectly flat, perfectly smooth, indistructable grey-white
stone. 

The stone that makes up the Grey Sea is notable for many reasons, but the one
that is immediately apparent is how flat it is. The Grey Sea is perfectly,
inhumanly flat. Despite being an expanse of land that takes nearly a month to
traverse, the ground is so flat you can see from one end to the other with a
good telescope and clear air. This flat terrain does not line up perfectly with
the terain on its borders. At the southern and northern entrances, the Grey Sea
sits 1.25 meters below the ground level. Scholars have attempted to excavate
along the southern edge, but were stymied by a lip of the material that makes up
the Grey Sea that extends down and out from the Grey Sea. Nobody is sure how
much of the Grey Sea lay hidden beneath the soil, like an iceberg sitting below
water.

Scholars had wondered why the Grey Sea has not filled up in the centuries before
and after its discovery. A simple experiment told them all they needed to know:
solids simply disappear in the blink of an eye after being left motionless on
the surface for 4.2843 minutes, and all liquids are drawn towards the center of
the Grey Sea.

At which point the second notable feature of the Grey Sea comes into focus. At
the exact center of the Grey Sea is absolutely massive tree. Named the
'Impossible Tree', the tree is known by many names. Because a tree this big is
bound to attract many names and stories.

Standing nearly two kilometers tall with a circumference of 15 kilometers, the
tree is visible from either end of the Grey Sea. The top kilometer of the tree
is covered with branches that form a giant single-tree canopy with a
circumference of 30 kilometers.

Used as a waypoint by anyone travelling beyond the Grey Sea, the tree is also a
refuge. While the roots of the tree slide into the stone of the Grey Sea without
seeming to disturb it; some people have said it seems like the tree is
[i]merging[/i] with the stone, and not just passing through it like normal roots
through dirt.

When liquids poured into the Grey Sea meet the roots of the tree, they are
quickly absorbed into the roots. Somehow, the tree is able to use such liquids
to grow the fruit that hang from its branches. These fruit are the reason why
the tree has become a semi-permanent camp along the way to Maka-Tho.

Edible by everyone who has passed underneath the branches of the tree, the fruit
is about as strange as the tree. No two people have tasted the same thing when
eating a fruit. For some people the fruit changes taste from bite to bite. In
most people the fruit seems to bring on a state of calmness and
relaxation. However, a tiny percentage of people are overwhelmed by a great
sadness which doesn't abate until they set foot on ground that isn't the Grey
Sea.

A small community of people have made the tree their home. Living in houses
suspended among the tree branches, they live carefree lives. A good source of
knowledge of the Grey Sea, the tree, and some of the surrounding mountains. They
mostly live off the fruit of the tree, and the birds and creatures that live in
the tree itself. They have several numenera that gather the water out of the air
in the valley. They seem to almost live in a symbiotic relationship with the
tree. This group of people are able to live care-free lives knowing that the
tree will protect them from harm.

The only time that anyone tried attacking the tree, they simply
vanished. Apparently the tree has some control or influence over whatever
mechanism removes solid objects from the surface of the Grey Sea.

For centuries, the Grey Sea and the Impossible Tree were interesting mysteries
-- but not many adventurers or explorers took the time to come more than
once. Because until somewhat recently, beyond the Grey Sea was Maka-Tho: a land
made unexplorable due to the strange pink mist that covered the land up to a
height of 2 kilometers.

[h2]The Mist of Maka-Tho[/h2]

Named after the mist that made the area impervious to explorers, Maka-Tho has
only recently opened up for exploration.

The strange pink mist was what caused most who came to turn back. The mist was
dangerous to any creature, living or otherwise, that attempted to pierce its
border. Unprotected creatures would have the moisture sucked from their bodies,
quickly turning them into dry husks. People who tried to protect themselves with
protective clothing or numenera discovered the mist had other qualities.

Folks who tried using a shield or other such cyphers found themselves
complaining of humidity before dying of heat exhaustion, despite the air
temperature being quite cool on the skin. The mist apparently lowered the
wet-bulb temperature until whatever brave soul entered the mist was felled like
all the others.

Lastly, folks who tried wearing protective clothes to keep the mist out found
that they were unable to see, the mist growing so dense that the only way to see
their extremeties was to press them to their goggles or face protectors.

The one artifical lifeform that was convinced to enter the mist exited two years
later, claiming to have done nothing but wander lost after all of it's
navigation ciruitry crashed or was hacked to give contradictory readings.
           
This all changed sixty-three years ago.

One day, the folks who live in the branches of the tree saw that the mist was
gone. To the north now lay an entire new region, waiting for those brave enough
to ride out and make the land theirs.

And Ager was one of the first people to venture out into this new land.

[h2]Homesteading in Maka-Tho[/h2]

Ager Hammersplint doesn't care why the mist is gone. Now that it's gone, there's
a whole new area of the Ninth World to explore, and come hell or high water
that's what he set out to do. An area the size of the Steadfast, unknown to the
eyes of man? Ager couldn't resist. It took him a few years, but eventually Ager
uplifted his entire life and moved it out to Maka-Tho.

First travelling back to the Steadfast, he gathered up his family and any who
would sign a contract. This base of 52 people served as the kernel of his new
expidition. Along the way to the Kala Arch they picked up a few more souls, and
a few more joined as the group traveled from the Kala Arch in Calda along the
road to the Grey Sea.

Upon reaching the northern side of the Grey Sea, they made camp just inside the
limits of where they mist used to stop. Gathering up everyone, Ager took to the
top of one of the wagons to make a short speech to the crowd.

"To those who have been with me from the start, and to those that joined along
the way: thank you. My heart is gladened to know that there are still
adventurers and explorers worthy of those noble titles alive today. Ahead of us
lay a new land. Untouched for centuries or longer, this is a land of
possibility. Of destiny. Of greatness. So long as you steel yourself and your
families for the troubles and trials that lay ahead, I promise that one day the
things we do out here will echo for eternity!"

This speech was recorded onto a bronze by a wright who had joined in the
Steadfast. The tablet was set into a pillar they raised from the ground, along
with the words "This is not where the journey of Ager's People started, nor
where it ended, but where the shining light of possiblity showed them the path
to greatness."

This pillar has become another part of the journey into the wild north; people
travelling into Maka-Tho usually leave an offering of food or an oddity before
continuing their journey into the north.

The group that traveled with Ager travelled for another three months before
finding a place fit to settle: in a sea of rolling hills they found one with not
only a spring of water but also the ruins of some great numenera that lay
burried beneath the earth.

Slowly the settlement has grown from a assortment of tents on the top of a hill
to a stronghold in the wilderness. Most of the people and families that were
part of the initial settlement have either built houses atop the hill, or spread
out into scattered farms. New people trickle in to the village from time to
time. Most spent a few summers doing odd jobs or scouting out nearby ruins, but
that all changed when Ager gained access to the ship.

The hill upon which the village was founded wasn't just sitting on top of some
old crumbled ruins. An ancient ship, from a much earlier age, lay beneath the
ground. This ship was massive. Once past the damaged section closest to the
surface, Ager found wonders. Caverns full of light and life -- forests and
jungles and grassy plains held within giant cavern sized rooms that maintained
the optimal temperature and weather patterns for the flora and fauna
within. Hallways of endless doors, leading to sleeping chambers, warehouses, and
rooms without explaination. Ager sometimes felt that it was less a ship, and
more of a burried city. Either way, it was deserted.

Or at least, mostly deserted.

[h2]Within The Ship[/h2]

Animals once kept in grand menageries have long since colonized some sections of
the ship. Abhumans from a different age have taken up residence in other
sections. Drones and other machines once slaved to the security systems of the
ship now roam the halls. This last group of residents are the most
dangerous. Some drones will only attempt to arrest you, taking their prisoner to
what have been the ships brig at one point. Whether that brig is in an area you
know well enough to get back to Ararholm is another matter.

However, there are stories of machines that roam the halls of the ship that
should you encounter them, your only recourse is to run. Machines that are only
whispered of in stories around campfires. Many new explorers think these just
fanciful tales, thinking it's just a tall tale to scare them away from the best
parts of the ship. The old timers keep their secrets though, and many wonder if
friends that never came back up lost their lives to the dread machine that
stalks the halls.

The ship didn't crash at this location, though. It crashed in some other
location, on a older version of Earth. It has been so long since the ship
crashed that it has had time to sink deep into the earth and be carried along
currents of magma before being spat back out, eventually coming to rest here.

Ager figured out how to get into the ship, and from his initial explorations
knew that what he had found wasn't just a ship. It held the key to unlocking
some of the most powerful numenera in the world. Somehow, in a portion of the
ship that only Ager knows how to get to, lay a machine intelligence. According
to Ager, this intelligence is able to unlock the secrets of any numenera brought
before it. He discovered this when the intelligence was able to teach him how to
use the three artefacts he had on him whose workings had eluded him.

Not only that, the intelligence knew that elsewhere in Maka-Tho lay powerful
numenera. Some were of the ship, pieces or cargo lost as it drifted through the
crust on its aeons long journey. Others were numenera unknown to the
intelligence, but it could sense through what little of the ships sensors still
worked.

Seeing in this intelligence the makings of an empire even greater than that of
the Sable Hegemony, Ager thought long and hard about how to use this
finding. Ager had seen too many friends, even enemies, destroyed by the numenera
-- either by getting themselves killed, or by getting their minds so twisted or
re-written that they barely counted as human any longer. He knew that in order
for his family to survive and gain control of these powerful numenera he'd have
to be careful, clever, and above all: wise.

Numenera have a price, and he just hoped that it was one him and his family
could afford.

Using information provided by the machine intelligence, Ager was able to start
building and planning. Once his daughter Pamki came of age, he started
instructing her in the use of the ship and the machine intelligence. Together
they do their best to guide Ararholm towards Ager's shining vision of the
future.

Ager died thirteen years ago, an old man surrounded by family and friends, at
the age of one hundred and twenty three.

Pamki is now twenty eight, and while she does her best to guide the town towards
her father's vison she knows that she is not the person her father was. Despite
spending his early life a glaive, many came to consider him more of an arkus --
a man of vision and charisma who shaped the town from nothing.

Spending most of her time these days stuck behind a desk in her family home,
Pamki still finds time to go down into the ship. Through corridors shown to her
by her father, she spends time at the console of the machine intelligence. While
she's never sure she'll fully trust it, at the very least it seems to understand
something of her position. She's not sure she'd call them friends, but what else
would you call the being you've shared most of your secrets with?

[h2]Growing A Culture[/h2]

In the sixty years since Ararholm was founded, life has been a test of endurance
and will. New skills and lore to survive the area had to be acquired. Laws had
to be created and someone had to be found to enforce those laws. The basics of
society, rebuilt again out on the edge of the frontier. It's only been in the
last handful of years that these questions have been answered by Pamki and her
family.

The town is overseen by a council of four: the innkeeper, the sheriff, the
wright, and Pamki herself. Pamki holds the role of town arcon, sort of a cross
between mayor and judge. Her main role on the council though is to cast
tie-breaking votes if one of the three abstains. Otherwise she does her best to
ensure that the laws and rulings from the council are fair and balanced, and
tries to provide what guidance she can about how to grow the town. The other
three council members are the ones who propose new laws and decide on new
projects to be undertaken. Their most recent success is the installation of the
Mortar of Light, a powerful numenera that will hopefuly protect the town the
next time there is danger.

Over time, they've built a mostly small set of rules and laws that keep things
civil outside of the occasional tavern brawl.

Some of the more important rules are those surrounding the process of becoming
[i]dangi[/i], which is a word from the Caldan empire meaning "extended
family". Most city-states in Calda have similar rules or traditions. This is
partially because despite surface level appearances, Calda is not as fertile or
abundant a land as those in the Steadfast. As cities grow, they often run into
issues with access to resources. Water is the usual culprit, with food a close
second.

[h2]Living In Calda[/h2]

Due to a quirk of geology or design, water is much harder to come by in
Calda. The land is honeycombed with caverns and passages, and most rivers are
underground. What water that can be found aboveground often needs to be treated
before it's safe to drink. Lakes and large open standing bodies of water are
rare, and when found are usually under strict access control by the city-state
that lives upon its shores.

Access to water doesn't just make growing food harder, the land itself
contributes to the struggle. In the areas that do have access to a reliable
water source, crop yields are nothing like what they'd be in the
Steadfast. Therefore it takes more farmland and more farmers to feed a city.

Once a city has solved those problems, they're often immediately faced with
other resource shortages. The forests of Calda produce trees with wood not very
suited for building. Either the wood is so hard it's nearly impossible to work
without specialized and hard to find numenera, it's so soft and pliant you can
work the wood with just your fingernails. Metals and minerals are often found
near underground rivers, making extraction without fouling the water very hard.

Mining accidents that foul a river so that it's undrinkable for weeks or months
is the most common cause of city-states going to war.

However, this harsh land has grown a hardy and resilient people. While not quick
to war, almost every person living in Calda is willing to fight and die for
their city-state, because living out in the wilds on your own is almost certain
doom. This is also the reason the Singhan Roots are so incredibly valuable to
not just the Sable Hegemony, but everyone living in Calda.

While every city-state must give some of their resources each year in a tithe to
the Sable Hegemony, none of those resources are wasted. Much of the city of
Tehis and the warren of catacombs beneath the city is given over to the storage
and preservation of what they receive in tithes. Some of this material stays in
Tehis to feed and cloth it's people, but most is stored for times of need. Not
just the needs of Tehis, either. Via a complicated and mind-numbing layer of
bueuacracy, any city of the Sable Hegemony can petition for aid and
supplies. Most cities over a certain size eventually grow a class of people
known as [i]tambayants[/i], or "askers". These are people, even entire families,
who spend their entire lives learning and navigating the bueuacracy surrounding
the petitioning for aid & supplies.

Even though the system is complicated, it ( and by extension, the Sable Hegemony
) survive because it [i]works[/i]. With the Singhan Roots, these supplies can be
brought to nearly any city in Calda within a day or two. This has allowed nearly
every city in Calda to make through a lean year or two. However, this bounty is
not limitless, nor is it without consequence.

Each 
----------------------



Because it is hard to feed and maintain a city, cities try to ensure that they
have as few citizens as possible who live within their borders.

[h2]This Old Ship[/h2]

When the mist disappeared, most who heard the tale were sceptical that this new
state of the world would last. There were questions about how the mist had been
dispersed. Had one of the explorer teams found a way to disperse it? Had one of
the many, many, many numenera that had been lost to the mist finally reacted? Or
has some other person or process removed the mist?

After six decades, most folks seem to agree that it's probably safe to travel to
Maka-Tho. If the mists were going to return, they probably would have done so.

This reticence is why for the first sixty years of it's existance, Ararholm
barely grew. Those that did come were usually explorers or hermits, gearing up
with provisions at Ararholm before venturing out further into the wilderness. 

However, now that popular sentiment seems to have shifted that slow drip has
turned into a trickle. Over 100 adventurers have shown up in the last two
years. The first few were lucky to be able to grab a bit of land inside the
walls of Ararholm, but the rest have created a tent city below the clifs of the
town.

Most who come now, come to explore the ship.

In order to gain access to the ship, there are a few things you have to do
first.

The first thing any new visitor to the town has to do if they wish to stay is to
spend some time as part of the town militia. Despite the mist supposedly
preventing any creatures from gaining access to the region, there are some big
nasty things that call the region home. Most have been killed or chased away
from Ararholm, but ocassionaly something big turns up and tries to eat part of
the town. Also, with no law to speak of there are some bandit tribes who have
moved themselves beyond the reach of the Sable Hegemony and into the wild lands
of Maka-Tho.

For the most part, the three month tour of duty passes peacefully. Those three
months are mostly spent at the guard tower at the entrance to the town, or
staffing one of the lookout posts along the wall. Once those three months are
up, the explorer becomes part of the "reserve militia". Now only expected to
serve a day or two a month, and they are also granted some rights as members of
the community.

The first is that they can put their name into the lottery to explore the
ship. Access to the ship is controlled pretty strictly, with only so many people
allowed in at once. This is the result of the chaos of the early days, when
multiple parties ended up dead due to a combination of mistaken identiies, fear
of the dark, and in a couple of cases: stupidity. The official reason is "to
ensure that there are enough bodies to help in a crisis on the surface", but the
unnoficial reason is still "you're all too dumb to do this without supervision,
and this is that supervision".

The second is that they're allowed to obtain the rights to a parcel of land

[h2]A Story Begins...[/h2]

This is where the party finds itself. The very knife edge of known civilization,
trying to help their benefactor gain control over a resource that could alter
the future of the entire Ninth World.

